---
layout: post
title: 6.5950 Lecture 1
categories: [lecture]
---
# Hardware Attacks on the Spotlight
- Rowhammer
- Specter
  - With branch in hand 
  - Correlates to branch prediction exploitation

## Hardware attacks
The attacks target a key micro-architecture mechanism of the processor:
speculative execution.

It is not a bug, which is a mis-implementation of the spec, it just means the
spec itself is wrong.


## Performance vs Security vs Power Tradeoffs
It is hard to make a processor that is faster, more secure, and doesn't use as much power.
Sort of a rope-pulling problem.

Usually get ad-hoc mitigation solutions.


## Hardware Security Features
Example: Apple M1 chip. Secure enclave.

## System Abstractions
- Programs
--> Virtual Machine
- System Software
--> ISA
- Comp Arch.
- Digital Circuits
--> Digital Abstraction
- Analog Circuits; Devices (transistors)

You really need to know how these things are connected together to exploit the interactions between the abstractions

## Demo: Abstractions Hides Details
### Program 1
Sums up integers 1 to 10.
```
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  sum += 1;
}
```
### Program 2
```
printf("Hello world");
```
Which one will take more instructions?
Program 1: 85
Program 2: 616

And this only counts non-kernel instructions.

Counting kernel:
Program 1: 1240
Program 2: 5321

Keep in mind that it's non-deterministic due to other things happening on computer, but this shows the point.
Point in case: abstractions hide away a lot of detail.

## 6.004 Review
### Basic Architecture Concepts
Let's say we are running a program.
We have a laptop.
The laptop has:
- CPU
- main memory (DRAM, 16GB)
- non-volatile storage (Disk, SSD, etc.)

How to execute the program?
Program is usually stored in non-volatile storage.
What should happen?
Pull things into main memory, but this is not a simple procedure.

In the old days, no OS.
Non-volatile storage is like the punchcard, and you need to manually put things into the punchcard reader (which goes to main memory).
To run program, look inside CPU, we have a special register called PC (program counter), which points to the place where we can read the program, which issues a command / instruction.
The memory replies and we write the instruction into the instruction buffer/queue.
This process is called "fetch."
Now we have to decode the instruction.
For example, add r1, r2, r3.
After decoding, we are going to execute it.
We have a register file, from which we can read source data, write destination data, etc.
After performing the right operation with the ALU, we "write-back."
Although, we might be wanting to use something from the memory (includes cache) instead, based on instruction.
We have a selector at the writeback stage
Overall, basic idea:
1. Fetch
2. Decode
3. Execute
4. Access memory
5. Writeback (from memory, or from ALU, based on instruction)

Timing:
```
t_clk = t_f + t_d + t_e + t_m + t_wb
```
To make this faster, we can employ some ideas, like:
- pipelining (allow multiple stages to execute at once)

Timing becomes:
```
t_clk = max(t_f + t_d + t_e + t_m + t_wb)
```
End up getting higher throughput.
Still some issues from allowing us to get the best throughput:
- data hazard
- control hazard

Some solutions:
1. Stall
2. Bypass
3. Guess / Speculate
